Inheritance in Java.
This is very important oops concept in Java and very widely used for numerous use cases.
So basically what is inheritance?
Inheritance is as it is suggested by its name, right?
We inherit properties from our parents, grandparents.
Similarly, classes inherit some properties from their super classes.
Okay, so.
So like we have eyes like our mother, but there is something different in us as well.
So subclass can have its different properties but it inherits some of the properties from the super
classes.
So this is a this is how the concept of inheritance is based on.
So let us learn more about inheritance in Java.
Basically, it is a mechanism in Java by which one class is allowed to inherit the features, methods,
fields of another classes.
So as I said, there are important terminologies like superclass.
That is the parent class.
We can say the class whose features are inherited.
Okay, that is a base class.
Also we can call or parent class.
Subclasses are the classes which inherit from the other classes.
Okay.
We can also call this extended class child class derived class, reusability, inheritance support,
the concept of reusability.
Then we want to create a new class and there is already a class that includes some of the code that
we want.
We can derive our new class from the existing class by doing this, and we are using this fields and
methods to existing classes.
So any multiple Java projects use inheritance.
That's why I say it's a very commonly used and very important oops concept and there are different types
of inheritance.
Okay.
Let us learn about the different types of any items and then we will see examples in the code for each
and every type here.
Okay.
So this is single inheritance, okay?
Single inheritance means there is a superclass and there is one subclass, and the subclass derives
from the superclass.
Simply this week there is a single inheritance.
Single class is a BEN class.
Then this is a multi-level inheritance.
There is a base class.
So class B derives from class E, a, class C derives from class B.
That's why it is a multilevel.
There are multiple levels here.
Okay.
There might be some more classes also in between.
So this this is called S multilevel.
Then this is all
hierarchical inheritance that is from one subclass.
Multiple subclasses are deriving one class and multiple derived classes.
So class B is deriving some of the features from a, class C is deriving some of the features from A
and B is also deriving from it.
Okay.
Then the next one we have is a multiple inheritance.
So basically multiple inheritance is not supported in Java but achieved that.
How can we achieve multiple inheritance if we want?
How to do that?
We will see in a simple example.
But one class cannot extend more classes here.
Okay.
So this is not possible in general.
Now let us go to the example section and learn about our examples.
Let us take the example of single inheritance here.
So there are two classes, superclass, and this is a subclass.
And we can call this as a driver class, which has a main method to execute this float.
Right.
So the superclass name is one, and there is a child that's named to child extents one.
So extents is a keyword used for inheritance here.
So if we want to inherit property of the class, to want to inherit property of class one, then it
has to use the extended keyword and write the name of the class.
Okay, this is the syntax to extend.
So once class two extends class one, that means it is now.
It can now access all methods.
Three.
Two.
And it can also access the method one.
What do you mean by access?
Our inherited the method one.
That means when you create object of class two, you will be able to access this both the methods.
Now let us see with example in the driver class here where we have main.
We have created object of class to which to name.
So the object again called the matter one and the same object can go method to also right.
Okay.
So this is example of single inheritance.
Then we saw single and inheritance.
That means one superclass and one subclass one the one that is a single inheritance.
Now let us then what this example two multilevel multi-level inheritance.
So I will create another class here.
Class three, which extends.
Do.
Okay.
A to B to C, that was for multilevel inheritance.
So to extend to one tree extends to okay now we will create a method inside trees that this tree.
Right now, the object of class three will have access to the metal inside it.
Then parent class and the basic class.
So now let's make this as an object of class to rename.
It will have access to the matter in the super immediate superclass and superclass of the superclass.
So it can go to the.
Now let's run this example and check.
One, two, three.
Look, you understand no single inheritance and how it is achieved.
Single inheritance, class.
One, two, two.
Now this is multilevel inheritance.
One, two, two, three.
This is how multilevel inheritance is at its that.
Okay.
Now we will go on to the next.
There is hierarchical inheritance.
What we do in hierarchical, in inheritance, like we saw in our diagram class, there is a class E
and there are two different classes B, C, D, and we'll all b, c, d inherit from class E.
Okay.
So one superclass that is E and three subclass, that is B, C and B and there is a mean class as a
driver class that is hierarchical inheritance.
Okay.
And to inherit we lose extents people.
So now Class A has its method in A, class B has its method.
Class C has it.
Middle class D has its method.
Okay.
Now, when you create object of class B last week and access, but B putting B, then you create object
of class c, c it can access, but in C and E, if you create object of class D, it can access but
in B but in a.
Right.
So this this can also any class can access method inside its IT itself and the superclass.
So let's run this particular example and check.
CAC meet ab ac 80 OC They cannot have.
They cannot access a new metal in between B and C, C and D because there is no collection connection
between the subclasses here.
The date.
Okay.
Now let's move on to the multiple inheritance.
The in multiple inheritance.
All the I have told you it is not possible with Java.
Yes, it is not possible.
We cannot add extend square and add all the few more classes to that.
Right.
One class in Java.
One class cannot inherit or extend from multiple classes.
Okay.
That's why we use interfaces here.
Part of Jim.
Multiple inheritance we achieve.
We use indices.
So what is multiple inheritance?
There are multiple super classes and there is only one subclass that is multiple inheritance.
Okay.
So now we will not be covering the concepts interfaces in this video.
We will be just covering how we can achieve the multiple inheritance interface concept will come in
the coming years.
Okay.
So that is one indices here, interface type one where it has a method, but then there is another interface
which has another method and there is another third interface which extends from these two interfaces.
So one interface can extend from two different interfaces, but classes cannot do that.
So now we have created the class or type child which implements the interface type three.
And this interface internally extends properties of type one and type two.
Okay.
So we can override any method inside any of these interfaces now because type child implements this
particular interface, the third one.
So now what we are overriding here, we are overriding the public geek method and we are printing it
here.
So here there is only matter declaration.
There is no definition of the method.
Method definition means when you add a code to the method, then it is called as method definition.
And then you just specify is a method that there is a method that belongs to this class that means method
declarations.
Okay.
The added definition to this method we are operating statement here.
Then we added this method which is printing this now this particular.
Child of class can create an object and access all these three matters.
And in this way, we can achieve multiple inheritance.
So if we want to access methods and properties from the old classes, we can create interfaces instead
of classes.
And then in interfaces, you can define the method, declare the method.
And then in no classes, actual class, you can override and add the definitions of the method.
But this is the way to achieve multiple inheritance.
So try this example.
Examples.
You can add some more methods and try to use the methods and variables in your subclasses and check
what issues you are facing.
And you will understand more scenarios also when you are trying this out.
So try this out and let me know if you have any questions.
So this is about interfaces.
Let's get to the next module.